JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back
to the controversies
swirling around Donald Trump
Jr. and the president's
top campaign aides.
The e-mail exchange published
by Donald Trump Jr. on Tuesday
reignited a legal debate about
whether members of the
Trump campaign engaged
in unlawful activity.
We get two perspectives
now, from Bob Bauer.
He served as White House
counsel to President
Obama from 2009 to 2011.
He is now a lawyer in private
practice in Washington.
And Jed Shugerman, He's
a professor at Fordham
University Law School.
Gentlemen, we thank you
both for being with us.
Bob Bauer, to you first.
We know the president's son was
told that the Russian government
had incriminating information
on Hillary Clinton that it
wanted to share with him.
Did he break a law
by pursuing that?
BOB BAUER, Former White
House Counsel: In my view,
we have some evidence.
We don't have all the evidence.
I would suspect the
congressional investigating
committee and the special
counsel will continue
to dig into questions raised
by the facts disclosed by The
New York Times and by Donald
Trump Jr. himself.
But this is highly suggestive
of a potential violation
of the law on two counts.
Number one, it demonstrates
that the campaign as a whole
had the intent to court support,
receive support, solicit
support from a foreign national
source, in this case, the Russia
government.
Second, in my view, the
meeting itself could constitute
illegal solicitation of support
from a foreign national
under campaign finance law.
So, it both has broad legal
significance, and on that one
specific issue of liability,
has a more concrete
significance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're
tying it to campaign
finance, is that right?
BOB BAUER: Yes.
I'm talking here about a statute
that has been on the books
for many years that Congress
tightened in 2002 that prohibits
receiving and soliciting
contributions from a foreign
national or providing
the foreign national with
substantial assistance
in trying to influence
a U.S. election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jed Shugerman,
listening to this, and I
know you have been looking at
the laws with regard to this
today, does this sound like
something that fits under that
legal definition?
JED SHUGERMAN, Fordham
University Law School:
Yes, I have been looking
at this quite a bit
and I have been
reading Bob's work.
And Bob is -- generally, he's
a terrific expert on this.
I think I disagree with
him and how far to apply
campaign finance law.
I'm very sympathetic to
his perspective here.
However, I think we're
getting into some dangerous
territory with applying
federal election law
too broadly at this stage.
News keeps breaking every day,
so I'm just saying, what we
know now, to argue that this
meeting itself is a violation
of the campaign finance law
raises a couple of questions.
First of all, it raises
the danger of applying
and criminalizing
contacts between anyone
in a campaign with
a foreign national.
Let me give you a hypothetical.
Imagine if there was a Web site
that published what purported
to be the birth certificate
of President Obama from Kenya,
and an Obama staffer went
and met with Kenyan nationals
to find out about the
veracity of that document.
Under this interpretation,
that would still be a thing of
value, but would we criminalize
the Obama campaign for checking?
And, similarly, would we say
of the Romney campaign, you
can't do opposition research
by investigating?
(CROSSTALK)
JED SHUGERMAN: Yes, go ahead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was just
going to say, let me just
stop you there on that point.
What about that, Bob Bauer,
that there's a danger here
in making this cover any kind
of information that is
shared with a campaign
by a foreign entity?
BOB BAUER: Well, that's
not the case at all here.
We're not talking about a
casual conversation with some
information that the campaign is
looking for it sort
of acquires by talking
to a foreign national.
We're talking about an
operational link between
a foreign government
and a campaign, one in
which the foreign government is
stating its intention to provide
ongoing support, dispatches
one of its emissaries, if we're
to understand the facts as
so far presented in the news,
dispatches one of its emissaries
from Moscow to Washington, D.C.
And on top of all that, not
only does the campaign indicate
that it's anxious for the
help, but, as you recall,
Donald Trump Jr. even suggests
in one of his e-mails that he
would like to discuss timing,
that if the information is as
good as advertised, he would
like to see it released
later in the summer.
The campaign finance
laws clearly distinguish
between the kind of
speech that I think that
Professor Shugerman is
legitimately concerned
about from this kind of
operational relationship
by a strong supporter
for a campaign engaged
in very specific
activities on its behalf.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jed Shugerman,
it is the case that the e-mail
to Donald Trump Jr. said the
Russian government wants
to help your campaign.
JED SHUGERMAN: All of this is
indicative or suggestive of
what we might find out later.
I think if we carefully read
the e-mails, I think it's hard
to make the leap that this
is like a coordination.
There's indications there.
I understand where Bob
Bauer is coming from.
So, I think we have to be
careful, though, because if you
read the e-mail from a little
bit of perspective of how could
this be applied in the future
and can we have line-drawing
here, it's hard to see where
this e-mail doesn't lead to some
effect of applying this to any
kind of contact
between a government...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me
now ask both of you.
And I will come to you,
Jed Shugerman first.
The word collusion, colluding
has been thrown around a lot in
the last few weeks about whether
the Trump campaign was colluding
with Russian officials.
Is there some legal
connection there?
Is that an issue?
JED SHUGERMAN: Well,
the word collusion is
more of a political
word than a legal word.
There is no statute
against collusion.
And -- but I think the
word we might turn to in
the law is conspiracy.
This is where we're headed.
I think there is a lot of other
information that is coming
out day by day that points
to this conspiracy.
And we may have conspiracy.
I think what we're getting
closer towards is a violation
of 1986 law of computer hacking,
because I think, if you look
at the timing, there are just
too many coincidences about
what the Trump campaign was
doing before and after this June
3 e-mail about President Trump
himself.
I just -- my point here is,
I think we need to be careful
in analyzing each step.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JED SHUGERMAN: I think there is
evidence that's pointing towards
crimes, but I think we need
to be careful when we
make interpretations
of these statutes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
we certainly want
to be careful here.
And we know we're speculating,
but we do think it's important
to ask these questions.
Bob Bauer, just quickly on
the conspiracy question?
BOB BAUER: Well, I think
there is a basis here.
And I don't disagree
with Professor Shugerman.
This is going to be an
ongoing investigation.
This is not the only evidence
that will be taken into account.
And certainly, if, in fact,
there is apparently a violation
of the campaign finance laws,
and the evidence is beginning
to point in that direction,
then, yes, the prosecutors
could certainly develop a
conspiracy charge or an aiding
and abetting charge based on
that.
If I could just add one more
point, this is not a statute
that is subject to the same
free speech considerations that
Professor Shugerman outlines
that apply in the domestic
U.S. context.
Today, for example, it was
very clear from the testimony
of FBI director nominee Chris
Wray, who was asked about this,
that, in his view, this sort
of communication between the
Russian government
and a campaign is a
national security matter.
And he said any meeting
like that shouldn't have
been taken unless the
campaign had consulted
with what he called
its legal advisers.
So, I think it was clear
from the FBI director's
remarks here this is a
national security issue,
the free speech considerations
are different, and the
implications are legal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
gentlemen, we are going
to have to leave it there.
Bob Bauer, Jed Shugerman,
we thank you both.
BOB BAUER: Thanks for having us.
JED SHUGERMAN:
Thank you very much.